From Hanselman it's dot com.
It's Hansel minutes, a weekly
discussion with web developer and
technologists. Scott Hanselman hosted by
Carl Franklin. This is Lawrence Ryan announcing
show number one Oh one
recorded live Wednesday, February 20th, 2008. Support
for Hanselman it's as provided
by Tellerik already controls the
most comprehensive suite of components
for windows forms and asp.net
web application. online@wwwdottlerikdotcomandby.net developers journal,
the world's leading Dutton and
developer magazine online at www
dot  dot com. In
this episode, Scott talks with
theoretical physicist and author dr.
Michio Kaku. Hi, this is
Scott Hanselman, and this is
another episode of Hansel minutes.
In fact, our 101st episode,
and we are sitting here
backstage at Microsoft Tegrity six
and fortunate enough to get
a moment to sit down
with dr. Michio Kaku, who
is the author of physics
of the impossible coming out
very, very soon. He'll be
starting his book tour, and
he is a theoretical physicist
cofounder of string field theory
and futurist. Thank you very
much, sir, for taking the
time glad to be here.
So your new book is
really interesting. It's about the
impossible made possible. There are
so many things that are
considered impossible, like in visibility,
teleportation starships Reagan's time travel.
And we visited us actually
believe that some of them
may be possible in the
coming decades, centuries, or even
millennia. They don't violate the
laws of physics. So I
wanted to write a book
taking apart, taking apart each
of these so-called impossible technologies,
showing that in the future,
we may very well have
them. Our descendants may have
them who isn't there a
rule in physics that if
something is not disallowed and
it is mandatory, that's right.
There's a famous rule. If
it's not forbidden, it's mandatory.
So we do believe that
it may be possible to
make an object invisible, perhaps
within a few decades, teleportation,
we can already teleport photons
and cesium atoms starships maybe
in the next century. So
I try to quantify some
of these things. So what
was it about teleportation in
the last 10 years that
has just been leaps and
bounds? I mean, 15, 20
years ago, you started talking
about teleportation. You'd be laughed
off the stage. Now we're
teleporting things every day. That's
right. In fact, businesses even
came up with rules saying
that you would violate quantum
theory to have an object
teleport. Ironically enough, we use
the quantum theory to teleport
photons and cesium atoms regularly.
The world's record is to
teleport a cesium atom under
the Danube river, as well
as photons. And we hope
to perhaps teleport the first
molecule, perhaps within five, 10
years. And there are some
bedding that maybe within 20
years, we may be able
to teleport viruses and organic
molecules. How do you measure
something like that? How do
you prove that you in
fact did it and you
didn't just blink and miss
it? Well, we have laser
beams that we know that
for example, the polarization or
the information contained in an
object, and then we have
another object on the other
side of the Daniel river
and we teleport that information.
So you actually destroy the
original, the information is then
carried over to this other
object. So captain Kirk, for
example, would be destroyed in
the process, but he would
rematerialize someplace else. Where is
he being stored? He's being
stored in something that we're
used to, or is he
being stored somewhere in a
quantum State? We use what
is called quantum entanglement. Believe
it or not. If two
objects are brought very close
together, they're wave functions, sort
of merge. They sort of
become like twins. And so
when you separate them, there's
an umbilical cord and invisible
in biblical cord separating these
two. And if you jiggle
one, the other one jiggles
passed within the speed of
light Einstein didn't like this,
but Hey, we've tested it
in the laboratory. And it
really does work. It's very
interesting. This idea of proximity
affecting so many things. You
talk about time, travel and
fundamental to that is bringing
two things that are very
large, very close together, but
not touching That's right. Many
times in theoretical physics, we
stretch the boundaries of what
is known and not known.
For example, I used to
teach on my optics course
that invisibility is impossible, light
bends in glass water. We
know how to bends and
you cannot make an object
invisible. Well, last year at
Imperial college, London and Duke
university in North Carolina, we actually
made objects invisible to microwave
radiation, think of a rock
in the middle of a
stream, water flows around the
rock. So that downstream you
don't even know that there
was a rock I'm stream.
Now replace the water with
light light can bend around
an object, which we used
to think was impossible reform
to make the object invisible.
Now just a few months
ago, we did it with
the proof of principle was
done in the optical range
with red lasers and green
lasers. So I would say
that within five, 10 years,
we may be able to
make an object invisible, at
least to one color. Interesting.
Now are these kinds of
things happening from within or
from without, I mean, is
the person making the object
going to have a pack
or is this going to
be an external force acting
upon the arm? Sure. I
think of the invisibility cloak
of Harry Potter. We're never going
to be that advanced, but
for example, the Pentagon is
funding. This, the Pentagon may
have a tank and then
put a cylinder, a cylinder
around the tank so that
when light hits the cylinder,
it follows the cylinder and
emergency to the other end
so that the tank is
invisible. So the Pentagon has
spent billions of dollars on
stealth technology. Stealth makes you
invisible to radar, but is
quite visible to light. You
can see a stealth bomber
with your naked eye. So
in the future, the stealth
bomber may actually disappear. That's
the goal of the Pentagon.
Anyway, That just makes me
think of predator because he
was invisible, but there was
just a shimmer just to
a flaw. The eye is
so good at telling when
something is not right. That's
the goal. The goal is
to make an object invisible
so that maybe it was
a little glimmer as the
person walked by. Interesting. Now
within the context of, of
Reagan's and lasers, I know
that the army and a
number of riots police already
have microwave emitting lasers that
will make your skin feel
like you're on fire. So
use it for riot control
and crowd control. Yeah. You
know, people often ask the
question, we have laser beams,
we can drill a hole
through a brick wall with
a laser beam. So why
don't we have handheld Ray
guns that you see in
star Wars? Well, the answer
is very mundane, but very
interesting. There are no handheld
power packs, big enough, powerful
enough to be placed in
your hand. That's the reason
we can build the gun.
That'll blast through steel blast
through brick, just like you
see in the movies, the
problem is you need a
nuclear power plant or the
other side to energize it.
So it's not very practical.
We need a power Pang
that you can put in
your hand. It seems that
with the movement towards green
and energy and ecology, you
know, being responsible as, as,
as we, you know, in
Microsoft work on technologies that
are going to be more
energy efficient. There is this,
perhaps this is already happening.
There's there's this power science
field that is just gonna
become so fundamentally important. I
mean, I can't keep my
laptop going for more than
two hours. How do I
expect to get a Reagan
and put a well, Hopefully
we can use nanotechnology technology
is the technology of individual
atoms. Right now we can
build an atomic Abacus and
advocates made of individual atoms.
We can make an atomic
guitar, but not much else.
We cannot make atomic ball,
bearings, levers, pulleys, and gears.
But one day we will,
we'll build an entire atomic
factory. That's a size smaller
than a cell. And so
we think that with nanotechnology,
we may be able to
solve many problems that we
can solve today. For example,
think of a star ship.
You think of captain Kirk
in a gigantic enterprise, and
you just do the mathematics.
The cost will be enormous
to send that near the
speed of light, nothing of
a nano ship, billions of
nano ships, each one, a
computer that you then send
with an electric field near
the speed of light, billions
of them to the nearest
star. Most of them never
make it, but a few
of them will make it
to the nearest star. And
when they come back, you
can get all the information
you want because of nanotechnology.
So nano ships are being
looked at by NASA. It's
a completely new paradigm. And
again, nanotechnology makes us possible.
I should also point out
the NetApp technology may also
save Microsoft and Silicon Valley.
Eventually Silicon power will be
exhausted. We're going to enter
the post Silicon era. Silicon
is not stable, electronically speaking
at the atomic level. So
they're useless as we begin
to etch on to individual
atoms, transistors, as small as
atoms. So Silicon Valley could
become a rust belt unless
we physicists use nanotechnology to
create quantum computers rather than
Silicon computers. No, I've heard
of the context of quantum
effects. We're reaching a point
where Silicon is so small
that we're starting to have
side effects. As things bump
into things, how is moving
to nanotechnology, gonna make that
easier? There are two problems
with Moore's law. Moore's law
says the computer power doubles
every 18 months, but George Harrison
said, all things must pass.
Even Moore's law by 2020,
we're going to be bumping
up right up against Moore's
law. Two reasons. One is
heat generation. These chips will
generate so much heat. They'll
melt the melt themselves. You
can fry an egg on
a Pentium chip of the
future. Second of all, a,
your Pentium chip has a
layer 20 items across today
by 2020, it will be
five items across at that
point. Leakage takes place. You
don't know who the electron
is, and I think short
circuits. Hmm. Hm. Hm. So
if things are continuing to
get smaller than nanotechnology context,
how is that not a
problem? I mean, where's the
where I don't sure where
the is. Well, the problem
is mass production and wiring
of these things. We can,
let's say build a transistor
made out of individual atoms,
transistors, just nothing but a
gate. However, how do you
mass produce it? How do
you wire? It they're so
tiny. You can't see it,
you blow on it and
thing, you know, just disappears.
So mother nature solve these
problems. 3 billion years ago. It's
called DNA. It's called the
nucleus of the cell is
called a cell. We're trying
to duplicate many of the
ingenious devices at the nanoscale.
The nature saw 3 billion years
ago. It's interesting, more and
more I'm seeing that scientists
are looking at nature to
solve their problems, rather than
trying to build a heart
from scratch. We take an
existing heart. We reduce it
down to its scaffolding, which
they've just recently done with
rat hearts. And then tell
it to build itself back
up by seeding it with
an individual skin That's right,
right. At the present time,
we can create from your
own cells, skin, bone, heart
valves, noses, ears bladders, and
within five years, the first
liver within maybe five, 10
years, the first pancreas. So
these are your own cells
that are grown in a
mold and are scaffolding. And
then it creates a human
body shop. Just like your
auto body shop, replaces body
automobile parts in case of
an accident in case you
age or have a disease,
we will grow new organs
of the body. Now your
new book, physics of the
impossible is coming out very,
very soon. Or what are
some of the other fantastic
technologies that are out there
Like time travel. I talk
about things that are impossible
that may be possible within
10, 20, a hundred years.
These are called class one,
impossibilities like Reagan's and star
ships and invisibility shields teleportation,
but a class two impossibilities
require thousands of years. For
example, time wormhole faster than
like rocket ships. These were
require much more time because
we would have to assemble
energy comparable to a star.
Now we can't do that
yet. And this is your
classification class one, two and
three That's right in class
three impossibilities are impossible with
the known laws of physics,
such as for example, reading
the future and perpetual motion
machines. They probably violate all
known laws of physics. Interesting.
I saw the reading, the
future coming. I didn't think
that perpetual motion would be,
I guess that would, Yeah.
When I was a graduate
store to get my PhD,
I was really bowled over
and fell off my chair.
When I finally realized the
reason why conservation of energy
is true. If I have
a system that does not
change with time, then if
the laws of physics don't
change with time, then the
system conserves energy, physical nervous
there. That's the reason why
energy is conserved. The laws
Newtonian physics does not change
with time. Quantum physics has
not changed with time. You
can get radiation emitted from
the big bang. The radiation
is identical. The radiation we
see on the earth microwave
radiation. So the laws of
physics haven't changed in 13.7
billion years We've yet. We
just discovered them to be
different than we thought they
were. Yeah. So it means
that the conservation of energy
has probably held for 13.7
billion years. This is a
stunning revelation that just blew
my mind away. When I
was a graduate student, getting
my PhD, who are we
to change it? Ah, yeah,
you have to go to
before the big bang to
alter the laws of physics
and axial. That's what I
do for a living. I
work and something called string
theory, where we actually do
go before the big bang.
We go before Genesis and
we talk about a multi-verse
of universes, but that's another
book. My book parallel worlds
talks about the multi-verse of
universities. Well, I remember my,
when in 1995, when I
read hyperspace for the first
time, the idea that here
was someone, some context, some
topic that was in my
mind, originally inaccessible, it was
being brought to me. And
it was the first time
that I'd sat down with
a popular science book, other
than some, you know, Carl
Sagans books. And it was
such a powerful experience to
be able to, to have
that come down to me
in the sense that I'm
not a PhD student at
the city university of New York.
And I really appreciate that,
that book. So talk to
me more about time travel
Well to build a time
machine. And I give a
blueprint in the book, you'd
have to assemble the energy
comparable Vento, but have a
star create a gigantic Adam
smasher that converges all the
energy to a single point,
sufficient to open up a
gateway through space and time.
The problem is however paradox
is what happens. If you
go backwards in time and
kill your parents before you
were born. If you kill
your parents before you're born,
how can you be born
to kill your parents before
you're born grandfather paradise? Right?
And the answer to that
is the universe probably splits
in half time is a
river. We think Einstein said
the river can speed up
or slow down, but the
river of time may have
whirlpools. The river of time
may have forks forks in
the river of time. So
maybe a parallel universe opens
up. And as a consequence
you killed, when you went
back into the past, you
kill someone who looks like
your father and mother, but
they're not. They're genetically identical,
but there are a parallel
mother and father Now is
that by virtue of the
fact that you went back
in time or is every
decision, every moment, every atom
split, every Dick electronic cake
causing a new universe has
put off. Well, there is
a theory called many worlds
and believe it or not,
it is one of the
dominant theories of the quantum
theory. At the present time,
we says that the universe
splits every time a decision
or a measurement has been
made. So there are carbon
copies of you existing in
billions of universities, where you
marry somebody different. You went
to a different college, became
a mass murderer instead of
an upstanding citizen or died
in infancy. And in these
other universes, Elvis Presley is
still alive. Now this does
that mean that we are
in the most probable universe
or are we just simply
we're in this one? According
to the quantum theory, we
haven't to be in one
universe among many, many possible
universes. Ours is very likely
the probability that we are
sitting here having this conversation,
that's quite large, but there's
also a probability that my
wave function is on Mars
right now. And that tomorrow
I'll wake up on the
red planet. I asked my
graduate students to calculate their
probability. You'll wake up on
Mars. The next day. You
will have to wait longer
than the lifetime of the
universe, but it's, It is.
And there is a non
zero possibility. That's right. You
can calculate the probability that
you will wake up on
Mars tomorrow. Now a lot
of our listeners are our
computer. People were programmers and
we're typically doing business applications,
but I'm interested in what
kinds of computer systems are
you using? Are you using
Mathematica to do this work?
What kind of programming are
you doing to theorize? Or
are you just a Blackboard
guy? Okay. You're not going
to believe this, but we
physicists work with the mathematics
that cannot be placed on
a computer. Okay. People say,
well, everything can be placed
on a computer, right? The
universe is a computer. Yeah.
Wow. We work with advanced
calculus with what are called
super manifolds in hybrid space.
And computer is, can calculate.
They can't function in that
realm, the universe that I
work in. And so we
have to use pencil and
paper. And basically we stare
out the window imagining what
surfaces look like in 11
dimensional hybrid space that are
super, super manifolds. Computers cannot
work the super numbers. You
know that one times two
is, is too right. But
one times two does not
equal two times one, but
with super numbers, one times
two does not equal two
times one. And yet all
our mathematics is based on
super numbers. That's why it's
called super string theory. And
these can not be placed
our computers. How much of
this is done with raw
horsepower of the mind or
versus intuition? How much do
you feel? Almost all of
it is done with intuition
mainly because the mathematics, a
computer is useless for us.
Very few of my friends
use Mathematica unless we have
a long, long calculation that
we have to do. Basically
we stare out the window
and play with equations. I
assume at this point, after
being, having done it for
25, 30 years, you can
just do this in your
head. Yeah. Most of the
time I share out the
window. Now my wife thinks
that's very strange. Cause I'm
staring out the window all
the time, playing with equations,
drifting in my head. But
all my friends do this.
All my friends who work
on string theory stare out
the window. It's like a
musician, a musician has melodies
in his head and plays
with his melodies. And that's
what we do. That's interesting.
One of the characteristics of
the computer person is the
often a lack of attention
or, and, and a lack
of attention to the ability
to just literally zone out,
go completely away. And I,
it seems to be people
are either one or the
other. They either have add,
or they are hyper attentive.
Well, to be a theoretical
physicist, you have to be
able to sit on your
butt for hours at a
time. Look at Newton. Newton
spent 18 months basically locking
himself in his room, working
out the greatest masterpiece in
the history of science. 18
months locked up. Einstein spent
several months working on general
activity. He lost something like
20 pounds working on general
relativity. The stress on his
body was so great. That's
what it takes. How often
do you, is this, is
this often a solitary situation?
Or can you sit down
and stare at the window
with a friend? Sometimes we
talk to each other. We
collaborate on papers. One time
a student of mine was
listening in on the conversation.
And she said that while
every word was English, when
you put all these words
together, it meant nothing. Absolutely
nothing. We use shorthand, shop,
talk, shop, talk to, to
express whole blocks of equations.
So when we talk to
each other, it's English, but
it's a short hand for
equations Putting it on the
spot here. But can you
give me kind of an
example? Cause I know how
I would explain, you know,
C sharp and.net programming to
my wife. And she would
agree that it is English,
but I have no idea
what you're saying. Well, for
example, if we're up in
Columbia manifolds, where we work
with so-called index theorems, we
have to be able to
calculate the different index theorems
for different manifolds in hyperspace.
And these are super manifolds
that exist, not just at
11 dimensional space, but 32
dimensional space. So altogether a
43 dimensional space is what
we have to work with.
And it's not something that
you can teach it. That's
interesting. So in thinking in
the context of children, I
have a two year old,
and I'm wondering when you
begin to teach someone the
basics and the kind of
the general math, how quickly
do people who are natural,
theoretical physicists, do they get
up to speed and immediately
move beyond? Is this something
that you found by 10,
15, you were, You were
done and you rated them
a different philosophy. I think
it's more a question of
interest rather, rather than innate
ability. I think by the
age of 10, I've interviewed
a lot of scientists of
my time. I have my
own radio show. I'm on
130 radio stations around the
country. And every time I
interview a scientist, I ask
him, how did you get
interested in science? They always
say the same thing. When
I was 10, it was
a telescope, it was a
chemistry kit. It was a
planetarium visit. That's what set
them off. And then by
the time they read 16,
it's all over. They discover
girls, peer pressure kicks in.
You lost him. So you
have six golden years from
10 to 16 to get
them hooked on science for
the rest of their life.
If you miss it. Well,
maybe they'll discover it later.
That's amazing that that's exactly
what happened to me with
computers. And now I have
to wait eight years for
my two year old to
be ready to become a
theoretical physicist. That's right. So
when your kids hit 10,
take them to the planetarium,
like computer games with them,
read science books, astronomy books,
planetariums, because that's when they
realized that mommy and daddy
are not the universe before
10, everything is mommy and
daddy after 10, they say,
well, how big is the
universe? And it freaks them
out when they realize how
big the world really is.
That's when you got to
grab them. Because like I
said, you know, your hormones
kick in by 16, 17
peer pressure. People say, you're
a nerd, you're a geek.
You know, you're a loser,
blah, blah, blah. And it's
over. You got to get
them during those years. Is
that what happened to you?
Did your parents hook you
up with something? Well, my
parents were very poor and
so I knew that I
had to make it on
my own. No one was
gonna give me something on
a silver platter. And so
I knew that I had
to do something on my
own. So I built an
atom smasher. When I was
in high school, I built
the 2.3 million electron volt,
beta Tron, particle accelerator, my
garage. Did anyone was anyone
hurt? No, but it blew
out every single circuit breaker
in the house. My mother
kept saying, why can't you
date a nice Japanese girl?
Why don't you, why do
you build these things? How
did you do this? Was
this a radio shack thing?
What was the capacitor? I
mean, where was the power?
It had 17 miles of
copper wire. Yeah. 400 pounds
of transformative steel. What did
you wrap it? Around high
school football fields. It's 17
miles of copper wire. That's
fantastic. Well, we're running at
a time cause you're getting
ready to go on stage
here at tech. Ready? Six.
I really appreciate you taking
just a moment to sit
down with me here in
the green room. Thank you
very much, doctor Michio. Kaku
okay.